>> Richard Feldman: So here,
we have our function definition up here.
And one of the many things that you can
do with a function is you can call it,
and sometimes you can call
it multiple times, and
sometimes you can call it multiple
times with different types.
So here, we have a call to Inc,
passing 42 which should work out great,
because it expects a number.
And here we have one passing a string,
which we want to not work out great.
So here we have a goal of one success and
one type mismatch.
So we wanna see that this one succeeds
because it's passing a number,
and then we wanna see that this one
fails because it's passing a string.
Again, we have a slide
real estate problem.
So I've actually got some ellipses here.
These numbers are not gone.
They're just hiding [LAUGH] so
that I can fit the more relevant
ones all on the screen.
Okay, so here we have 0 through 3 up here.
And then we have 6, 7, 8, and
9, which are currently null.
Let's go ahead and assign those.
So here we're finding,
again, we're using ink.
So since we already have ink in scope,
we're saying yeah,
we're not gonna bother creating
a new one and some linking them.
We're just gonna say,
go straight to the source.
This one is 0.
This one is also 0.
We do need a new one for this, because
this is a expression that we haven't seen
anywhere else, so that's going to go in 6.
7 is going to be the entire call itself.
So this is what the call evaluates to.
So if we said like const whatever equals,
then that would be similar to seven.
Same basic deal here
except we're gonna use 8,
9 because we already used those earlier.
Okay, so the next thing we're gonna do
is we're gonna do unify of six and.
This would be number but
again, screen real estate, so
6 right here being essentially like,
hey, I am a number literal.
So no problem there.
It's a number literal.
That's just all that's happening there.
Then we're gonna unify six and two and
the reason for that is that, basically,
this is where we get into the like,
function calling rules.
So pretty intuitive if you're calling
a function passing a particular type,
that function's argument at that
position had better have the same type.
So we're going to unify them.
So here's our 6 and then here's that 2,
going to unify those.
This is an example of the way that you are
calling a function actually influencing
the function's type itself.
So if we didn't know what
this thing's type was,
the fact that we've unified these
would cause it to say like,
now this function is a number,
when previously maybe it wasn't.
Although we will see a little bit later
why that's not actually what we want,
and what we're really gonna do after we
move on a little bit is something slightly
different than this.
Then we're gonna unify 7 and 3, so
this is basically the The entire
expression corresponds
to the return value.
So, in exactly the same way that when
I call this passing this argument,
this argument had better have the same
type as what we're passing in.
It's also the case that whatever this
whole expression evaluates to had better
be the return type of that function.
So that's what's putting those together,
then basically we're just gonna
do the same thing for string and
this with the argument and
then that with the return type.
So just the same stuff repeated, but
with string and the different numbers.
Okay, so unifying 6 to the number,
very straightforward,
that just becomes a number.
Unifying 6 and 2,
we basically just go do the check.
Okay, that's also a number,
no problem, leave it alone.
7 and 3, now 7 is symlinked to 3,
8 and string, 8 is now string.
And now we have a type mismatch.
So everything was working great until
we tried to unify ID number eight
with ID number two because eight is
already the concrete type string from
the previous step.
And two is already the concrete
type number from back
earlier in the unification process.
So okay, sure enough,
we did get what we wanted.
We wanted to get one success, so
this one did successfully unify.
And then one failure,
this one indeed was a type mismatch.
So hey, the system works.
Fantastic.
Also, if you want, you can keep going and
unify nine here, but at this point,
that's kind of pointless because we're
never gonna actually make use of it.
I mainly bring this up on the context
of when you hit a type mismatch,
there are a few different
things the compiler can do.
This once again is another one of those
things where it's sort of up to you as
the compiler author to decide
how you wanna handle that.
One thing you can do, which I would not
advise, is you can say, we are done.
As soon as we hit our first type mismatch,
you get reported that one type mismatch
and we will never do any more type
inference ever again and
you get to go solve that one.
Once you solve that one,
then I'll maybe give you another one.
Nobody wants that.
[LAUGH] People would definitely prefer to
get all the tightness matches at once.
Or well, I guess maybe not, if it's
gonna be repeats or redundant ones but
that's another topic.
The point is usually it might seem
pointless to keep going with something
like this, where it's like,
we're already in tightness match.
Smashing what are you doing?
Just stop working.
But it's like, no actually, if you want
to give people nice error messages,
multiple error messages, and
there's other type mismatches,
you really should keep going
after a tight mismatch.
So these, like other unifications, you
generally tend to want to proceed with.
And like I said, there's a couple
different ways to handle this, but
quite often, what you'll do when you get
to this point is you'll record a special
type in here that's not quite concrete.
And not quite a symlink and
also not quite null,
but it's this fourth thing
that's called like an error.
And error has its own special set of
unification rules that are kind of
designed to be like,
just let me keep going and doing my thing.
I know that we blew up here and
like this doesn't make sense.
That we've reached this sort of
logical impossibility where this thing
is trying to be two
different things at once.
So we're not gonna pretend it's a string,
because that could cause
problems downstream.
We are gonna write down this is,
like a the type of this thing is
a something bad happened, basically.
And then in the different branches of
unify, you just sort of like handle that
differently depending on what
it's trying to unify with.
So not gonna get into that for.
Purposes of this workshop.
But just to be aware, this is the point
where, in a real production compiler,
I wouldn't stop here and say,
forget about that last unify.
It's pointless.
I would, in fact, unify it and and
I also would have, not left this a string.
I would have changed it to
some sort of error type.
Okay, so we did the thing.
We had a goal of one success and
one mismatch, and we achieved our goal.
Fantastic.
All right, to summarize part 5,
we talked about inferring conditionals.
So we started off with just the ternary.
We had a little bit of carryover from our
previous multiplication example where
the question mark,
like right before the question mark,
that had to be a bool that was hard coded,
no questions asked.
But it was also a little bit different
than the multiplication because the two
different branches didn't have to be
a number like they did in the case of
the operands for exclamation point.
But they did have to be
unified with each other.
They have to be quote unquote identical,
essentially and
then also they had to be unified
with the expression as a whole.
So there was sort of a three-way
unification at no point in that
unification or doing anything hardcoded.
It's just like, yeah.
The relationship these three things have
to have with each other and of course,
there are opportunities for
tight mismatches there as we saw.
Then we talked about inferring just the
function declaration without taking into
account any calls.
And we saw things like, we already have
considerations like the return type,
the return statements,
and how those interact.
So however many return statements
you have, you need a unify for
every single one of those to
unify that with the return type,
which can not only affect the return type.
But also can be a source of tightness
matches if they happen to disagree.
Then we got the argument types, then
of course the function body as a whole,
which introduced our new concrete
type that has additional information.
Which requires additional
branches in Unify,
which we will start to see as we progress.
And then finally we got into function
calls, where we saw that, yeah, not
only does the function definition set the
and give you a way to affect these types.
But also, as the calls participate in
the unification process, you can actually
either end up changing the functions
type or causing type mismatches.
Because the way that you know one call
site is doing it like disagrees with
another call site or one call site
disagrees with the definition itself,
which is what we saw here